### 2. Sample Size Calculations
In designing a study, we need to decide what sample size will be sufficient for our needs. This problem will step you through the logic to make that decision for two scenario, using the “confidence interval width” approach. This is only one of several ways that people make this decision.

#### a. First scenario - known population standard deviation
A quality control engineer needs to certify the wall thickness of a particular type of glass bottle. The engineer plans to randomly choose n bottles manufactured over the past month from the set of all bottles manufactured during that time. They will measure the wall thickness in millimeters for each bottle, then use this data to construct a `95%` confidence interval on the mean wall thickness. Suppose that the engineer is very sure that the population standard deviation of wall thickness is `0.08` mm.

**i)** When we know the population standard deviation, we can use a $Z_{0,1}$ distribution instead of a `t distribution` for finding a confidence interval on the population mean. The $(1-\alpha)\%$ CI on $\mu$ formula is then: $(\bar x - z^* \frac{\sigma}{\sqrt n}, \bar x + z^* \frac{\sigma}{\sqrt n})$ where $z^*$ statisfies $P\{Z_{0,1} < z^*\} = 1-\frac{\alpha}{2}$.
Last year, the engineer computed the `95%` CI on the population mean wall thickness from a data set with $n = 9$ and $\bar x = 4.06$, with $\sigma = 0.08$. What was the interval that they calculated? Show your derivation in detail, carrying as many significant figures as you can.

**ii)** Use your calculator to compute the same CI (on a TI-84: `STAT` -> `TESTS`  -> `ZInterval`). Write down your calculator model, your buttons to get to the CI input screen, all of your input values and what they represent, and the final confidence interval.

**iii)** What is the width of the CI that you calculated? (please show how you derive it and report your answer to the `4th` decimal place)

**iv)** Suppose that the engineer wants to have a smaller width this year when they compute the CI. Write down a formula to express the width of the CI and then explain how changing the sample size affects the width of the interval.

**v)** Suppose that the target width for the `95%` CI this year is `0.06` mm. What sample size is necessary to achieve that width, given the assumptions that the engineer is willing to make? List the assumptions explicitly.

**vi)** Calculate the necessary sample size for widths in the interval `0.04` to `0.08` (by `0.01` changes) and plot the sample size versus the width to see the trade-off between sample size and `95%` CI width.


#### b. Second scenario - unknown population standard deviation
In this second scenario, we are not willing to assume that we know the exact value of the population standard deviation. Therefore, we must use the `t critical value` instead of $z^*$. The critical value is dependent on the sample size through the degrees of freedom. Let’s now repeat the parts above under this different scenario.
**i)** Last year, the engineer had a data set with $n = 9$ and $\bar x = 4.06$, with $s = 0.08$. What was the `95%` confidence interval that they calculated? Show your derivation in detail, carrying as many significant figures as you can.

**ii)** Use your calculator to compute the same CI (on a TI-84: `STAT -> TESTS -> TInterval`). Write down your calculator model, your buttons to get to the CI input screen, all of your input values and what they represent, and the final confidence interval.

**iii)** What is the width of the CI that you calculated? (please show how you derive it and report your answer to the 4th decimal place)

**iv)** Suppose that the engineer wants to have a smaller width this year when they compute the CI. Write down a formula to express the width of the CI and then explain how changing the sample size affects the width of the interval. Explain carefully – do not simply say something like “as the sample size increases the CI width increases”.

**v)** Suppose that the target width for the `95%` CI this year is `0.06 mm`. What sample size is necessary to achieve that width, given the assumptions that the engineer is willing to make? List the assumptions explicitly. Use the **TEA** method: `T = try a value, E = evaluate the outcome, A = adjust the value` (repeat as necessary). Should your calculations along the way by constructing a table with columns:
  1) Value for $n$;
  2) $t^*$ critical value with n-1 degrees of freedom,
  3) achieved width,
  4) comparison to target,
  5) direction for adjustment; and with rows for each value that you try.

**vi)** Calculate the necessary sample size for widths in the interval `0.04` to `0.08` (by `0.01` changes) and plot the sample size versus the width to see the trade-off between sample size and `95%` CI width.

#### c. Comparing these two scenarios by discussing:
**i)** the effect on the required sample size, depending on whether you know the population standard deviation or whether you are estimating it

**ii)** the desired width’s effect on the required sample size in both scenarios

#### d. Solidify your understanding
Writing two or more statements that Dr. A could use as fill-in-theblank questions on the final exam. Underline the part(s) that should be the blank(s).